blog: write Tokio 1.0 announcement (#526)
tokio-rs/website: content/blog/2020-12-tokio-1-0.md

---
date: "2020-12-23"
title: "Announcing Tokio 1.0"
description: "December 23, 2020"
---

We are pleased to announce the 1.0 release of Tokio, an asynchronous runtime for
the Rust programming language. Tokio provides the needed building blocks for
writing reliable networking applications without compromising speed. It comes
with asynchronous APIs for TCP, UDP, timers, a [multi-threaded, work-stealing
scheduler][sched], and more.

[sched]: https://tokio.rs/blog/2019-10-scheduler

Over the years, we have been delighted watching our users build amazing things.
For example, [Discord] used Tokio to reduce tail latencies 5x. [Fly.io] found
that, with Tokio, they can effortlessly meet their performance requirements and

> focus on delivering features to their customers. For [ZCash], building on Tokio

Reviewer: ```suggestion
focus on delivering features to their customers. For [the Zcash Foundation], building on Tokio
```
(i think there are a couple different orgs associated with the zcash project?)

enables them to design misuse-resistant APIs. For AWS, their [Lambda][lambda]
team used Tokio to implement more reliable and flexible services.

[Discord]: https://blog.discord.com/why-discord-is-switching-from-go-to-rust-a190bbca2b1f
[Fly.io]: https://fly.io

> [ZCash]: https://www.zfnd.org/blog/futures-batch-verification/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[the Zcash Foundation]: https://www.zfnd.org/blog/futures-batch-verification/
```

[ZCash]: https://www.zfnd.org/blog/futures-batch-verification/
[lambda]: https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/

The [tutorial] is the best place to learn how to get started with Tokio.

[tutorial]: https://tokio.rs/tokio/tutorial

# A stability guarantee

We first [announced] Tokio over four years ago. Since then, it has evolved
significantly. The most notable change happened a year ago with the addition of
[async and await][async_await] to Rust. Today, Tokio is easier to use and more
powerful. This evolution has also caused some friction. It has required

> libraries to track these changes. It could also result in confusing error
> messages when accidentally depending on multiple versions of Tokio.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph has a lot of short sentences of the same length.
```suggestion
libraries to track these changes, and could result in confusing error
messages when accidentally depending on multiple versions of Tokio.
```

[announced]: https://medium.com/@carllerche/announcing-tokio-df6bb4ddb34
[async_await]: https://tokio.rs/blog/2019-11-tokio-0-2

The Tokio 1.0 release ends this churn. As part of the release, we are committing
to providing a stable foundation for the ecosystem. We have no current plans for
Tokio 2.0 and we commit to holding back on a Tokio 2.0 release for at least 3
years. We also commit to maintain the Tokio 1.0 branch for a minimum of 5 years.
Tokio will keep a rolling MSRV (minimum supported rust version) policy of 6
months. When increasing the MSRV, the new Rust version must have been released
at least six months ago.

> This stability does not mean that Tokio will stagnate. We still have a lot of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This stability does not mean Tokio will stagnate. We still have a lot of
```

Reviewer 2: I think it's more natural to keep "that" here.

Reviewer 3: My criteria is if removing it doesn't hurt legibility. But I'm fine either way!

work to do.

# 2021

We expect to focus on a few areas this coming year: `Stream`, `io_uring`, tracing
integration, and the Tokio stack.

## `Stream`

Today, the [`tokio-stream`] crate provides asynchronous iteration utilities
based on the Stream trait. An [RFC] to move the [`Stream` trait][Stream] from
[`futures-core`] to the Rust standard library is pending approval.

Once the standard library provides the Stream trait, Tokio’s stream utilities

> will move into the tokio crate itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
will move into the Tokio crate itself.
```

[`tokio-stream`]: https://docs.rs/tokio-stream
[RFC]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2996
[Stream]: https://docs.rs/futures-core/0.3/futures_core/stream/trait.Stream.html
[`futures-core`]: https://docs.rs/futures-core/

## `io_uring`

> [`io_uring`] is a new Linux interface providing asynchronous operations for all I/O,
> including disk, while reducing required syscalls. Currently, on Linux, Tokio

Reviewer 2: When speaking the post out loud, this is awkward.
```suggestion
[`io_uring`] is a new Linux interface providing asynchronous operations for all types of I/O,
including disk, while reducing the required number of syscalls. Currently, on Linux, Tokio
```

> Currently, on Linux, Tokio uses the epoll interface, which notoriously does not

Reviewer: TIOLI:
```suggestion
Currently, on Linux, Tokio uses the `epoll(7)` interface, which notoriously does not
```

> uses the epoll interface, which notoriously does not work for disk access. To

Reviewer 3: A link explaining this in more detail would be good. I keep forgetting what is and isn't possible w/ epoll which should be evident by my questions about it on Discord!

Author: The linked PDF should cover the details. It includes a discussion of existing ways to do I/O on linux.

filesystem APIs by dispatching synchronous operations to a thread pool. While
this works, it is not optimal.

> By leveraging io_uring, Tokio will be able to provide genuinely asynchronous
> filesystem operations. Additionally, early benchmarks of io_uring are very

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By leveraging `io_uring`, Tokio will be able to provide genuinely asynchronous
filesystem operations. Additionally, early benchmarks of `io_uring` are very
```

> filesystem operations. Additionally, early benchmarks of of io_uring are very

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
filesystem operations. Additionally, early benchmarks of io_uring are very
```

> promising and we are hopeful these performance improvements will carry over to
> Tokio.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
promising and we are hopeful that these performance improvements will carry over to
Tokio.
```

[`io_uring`]: https://kernel.dk/io_uring.pdf

## `tracing`

Defining a first-class story around operating Tokio applications will be a focus
for 2021. A big part of this story will be tooling around tracing and metrics.
The [`tracing`] crate already provides much of the needed infrastructure. It
implements a facade layer and data model for structured diagnostics, allowing
both libraries and applications to emit machine-readable data that can be
consumed in a variety of ways.

Over the coming year, we will build deeper integration between tracing and the
rest of the Tokio stack. This integration will help provide the needed

> visibility into Tokio's internals to answer questions like, "how can I tune the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
visibility into Tokio's internals to answer questions. Like, "how can I tune the
```

Author: I don't think "Like, ..." is a complete setence on its own?

Reviewer 3: In this instance the full stop is intended to prevent overly long sentences. It does seem a bit odd with the quoted questions, but I do read examples formulated like that all the time in technical literature. Like what I'm doing here.

One alternative would be to not phrase it like literal questions and instead write sentences describing their intent and go from first to third person.

> Like, "how can I tune the Tokio runtime to reduce my tail latencies even further?" [..]

Into:

> Like how you can tune the Tokio runtime to reduce tail latencies, know what tasks are currently running, or which locks are the most contended.

Author: I'll do that

Tokio runtime to reduce my tail latencies even further?", “what tasks are
currently running in my program?” and “which  `tokio::sync` locks are the most
contended?”

Furthermore, we will continue to improve and grow the rest of the `tracing`
ecosystem. This includes work towards new releases of the core `tracing` and

> `tracing-core` crates, adding richer instrumentation to the libraries in the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`tracing-core` crates. Adding richer instrumentation to the libraries in the
```

Tokio stack, and providing integrations with other diagnostics and observability

> tools, like [`tracing-opentelemetry`].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tools, such as [`tracing-opentelemetry`].
```

[`tracing`]: https://crates.io/crates/tracing
[`tracing-opentelemetry`]: https://crates.io/crates/tracing-opentelemetry

## The Tokio stack

Tokio provides a runtime and asynchronous APIs for standard primitives such as

> sockets and timers. That said, networking applications will often use protocols
> such as HTTP and gPRC. The Tokio stack includes Hyper for HTTP and Tonic for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sockets and timers, but networking applications will often use higher-level protocols
such as HTTP and gPRC. The Tokio stack includes Hyper for HTTP and Tonic for
```

with Tokio 1.0 support. Tonic will be updated shortly.

[hyperel]: #

> With Tokio 1.0 out the door, we will also focus on Tower, a set of reusable
> components for building reliable clients and servers.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Tokio 1.0 out the door, we will also focus on [Tower], a set of reusable
components for building reliable clients and servers.

[Tower]: https://crates.io/crates/tower

```

> and Tonic 

Reviewer 2: This paragraph is incomplete.
